## Baseline

*(text taken from the user manual v.03032017)*

The epidemiological features of the model used to construct the baseline setting will be described in detail below.

- Incidence: The model will predict the expected monthly incidence of both detected and total clinical Plasmodium falciparum malaria cases per 1000 of the population per month.
- Prevalence: The model will predict the expected underlying true prevalence of Plasmodium falciparum as a percentage of the total population of the chosen subnational area. This represents the model prediction of percentage prevalence of this area as if a cross-sectional survey would have been carried out using a highly sensitive detection method such as high volume PCR.  
- Annual parasite incidence (API): The user may input a chosen target API and this will be converted to the monthly incidence equivalent and shown on the incidence graph as a straight dark blue line. The detection rate, coverage level of pre-existing interventions, level of importation of cases and treatment failures rates at baseline, in combination with the human biting rate, will all affect the model’s prediction of the malaria burden. The other baseline values can be adjusted to result in a model prediction that is as close as possible to the target API selected by the user. 
- Number of mosquito bites per human per night (peak season): This is the number of mosquito bites per human per night on a person without an insecticide treated net (ITN) measured at the peak of the transmission season. For many locations, such an estimate has not and will not be measured. It will depend on many complex and interacting factors, but for simplicity it can be adjusted by the user to obtain the desired malaria incidence once all the other baseline values have been selected. 
- % of all infections that are caught outside the village (forest): Again, this is very unlikely to be supported by data due to the lack of studies to measure it. Therefore, the expert knowledge of the user must be applied to estimate this value for the chosen setting. It is not an essential part of model and only contributes slightly to the expected impact of reactive case detection (RCD) with a radial search. 
- Baseline % of all clinical cases treated: This is the baseline percentage of all clinical cases that are detected and treated. Such a value could be estimated from expert knowledge of the area, the number of people per health facility (e.g. health centre, clinic, community health worker, hospital) and/or the typical distance of a person from a health facility. 
- Baseline coverage of ITN (%): The percentage of all people who own an insecticide treated net (ITN) in the area.
- % of infections averted due to ownership of ITN: The percentage of all infections that can be averted given that firstly a person owns an ITN and secondly that they sleep under it. 
- Baseline coverage of IRS (%): The percentage of the population currently covered by indoor residual spraying (IRS). This may be zero in many cases since this is not a commonly used intervention in the Mekong. 
- % reduction in biting rate due to IRS: This is the reduction in biting to be expected in a typical population covered by IRS. 
- Imported clinical cases per 1000 population per year: The expected number of clinical cases per 1000 of the baseline population that enters each year from another setting while infected with clinical malaria. 
- Imported asymptomatic microscopically detectable carriers per 1000 population per year: The expected number of individuals per 1000 of the baseline population that enters each year while infected with asymptomatic malaria that is detectable by microscopy.  Since this value is rarely measured, it can be estimated using expert knowledge on the likely source of the migration. If the source of the imported cases is expected to be a low transmission setting, then it is recommended that this figure is made equal to the imported clinical cases per 1000 population per year. If the source of the imported cases is expected to be a high transmission setting, then it is recommended that this figure is made equal to five times the imported clinical cases per 1000 population per year.
- Imported asymptomatic microscopically undetectable carriers per 1000 population per year: The expected number of individuals per 1000 of the baseline population that enters each year while infected with asymptomatic malaria that is undetectable by microscopy.  Since this value is rarely measured, it can be estimated using expert knowledge on the likely source of the migration. If the source of the imported cases is expected to be a low transmission setting, then it is recommended that this figure is made equal to the imported clinical cases per 1000 population per year. If the source of the imported cases is expected to be a high transmission setting, then it is recommended that this figure is made equal to five times the imported clinical cases per 1000 population per year.
- % of cases failing treatment in 2018 and before: An estimate of the amount of treatment failure due to the presence of artemisinin, partner drug or multi-drug resistance in the area in 2018. 
- % of cases failing treatment in 2019: An estimate of the amount of treatment failure due to the presence of artemisinin, partner drug or multi-drug resistance in the area in 2019. This figure should be the same as or higher than in 2018 unless the program plans to switch to a new treatment where resistance to this new treatment is expected to be lower. 
- % of cases failing treatment in 2020 and after: An estimate of the amount of treatment failure due to the presence of artemisinin, partner drug or multi-drug resistance in the area in 2020. This figure should be the same as or higher than in 2019 unless the program plans to switch to a new treatment where resistance to this new treatment is expected to be lower. 
 
